--- page 1 ---
Lecture 3 Predictive
Analytics II
Lek Hsiang Hui (hsianghui@nus.edu.sg)
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 1
--- page 2 ---
Outline for Today
From traditional methods to modern LLM predictors and unsupervised learning
1 Traditional Models
Bayes, KNN, Trees, SVM & Neural Nets 2 LLMs & Prompt Engineering
Zero-shot, few-shot, and modern prompt design
3 Model Performance
Resampling & Cross-Validation 4 Clustering
Finding hidden subgroups & K-Means
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 2
--- page 3 ---
Recall: Classification (Supervised)
Using existing data instances (labeled) to learn a model for predicting subsequent
instances (unlabeled)
Example:
Assume that you have some attributes of the current weather, and we need to decide
whether to go out to play.
outlook: rainy
temperature: mild
humidity: high
windy: TRUE
➔Classifier ➔ play: ?
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 3
--- page 4 ---
Part 1: Traditional Classification Models
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 4
--- page 5 ---
Traditional Classification Approaches
A
Naïve Bayes
Probabilistic classification using statistical
relationships
B K-Nearest Neighbors
Classify based on closest neighbors in data
C Decision Trees
Split data based on feature thresholds D Support Vector Machines
Find optimal separating hyperplane
E Neural Networks
Learn patterns through interconnected layers
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 5
--- page 6 ---
1. Probabilistic Methods: Introduction
Bayesian methods are probabilistic classification models. Instead of rigid labels, they
predict the probability of each class given the input data ().
Input (x)
outlook: rainy
temp: mild
➔
Probabilities P(y|x)
P(yes | x) = 80%
P(no | x) = 20%
➔
Prediction (y )
play = yes
Rule: Always pick the class with the highest probability!
max
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 6
--- page 7 ---
1. Probabilistic Methods: Email Spam Classification
Goal: Classify an email as Spam or Not Spam.
Input Email (x)
"Congratulations! You won
a free lottery!"
➔
Evaluate P(y|x)
P(Spam | x) = 95%
P(Not Spam | x) = 5%
➔
Decision (y )
Spam
max
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 7
--- page 8 ---
1. Bayesian Methods: Bayes' Theorem
To calculate the posterior probability , Bayesian methods make use of Bayes'
theorem to transform this into another form:
where:
 = predictors
 = target
The denominator  is the probability of the predictors, which acts as a normalizing
constant.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 8
--- page 9 ---
1. Bayesian Methods: Simplifying the Equation
Assume there are 3 classes ( ). We calculate:
Notice that all of them are divided by the same denominator .
It doesn't affect the  decision! We only need to maximize the numerator:
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 9
--- page 10 ---
1. Naïve Bayes Classifiers: Chain Rule
To calculate the likelihood , we can use the chain rule of probability.
For predictors :
Calculating these conditional probabilities directly from data is very difficult without
massive datasets.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 10
--- page 11 ---
1. Naïve Bayes Classifiers: Conditional Independence
Naïve Bayes makes the strong assumption of conditional independence: each attribute
 is conditionally independent of every other attribute  (for ), given the class .
After conditional independence assumption:
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 11
--- page 12 ---
1. Naïve Bayes Example: Weather Data
Outlook TemperatureHumidity Wind Play
Sunny Hot High Weak No
Sunny Hot High Strong No
Overcast Hot High Weak Yes
Rain Mild High Weak Yes
... (14 rows of data)
Goal: Given {Outlook = Sunny, Temp. = Cool, Humidity = High, Wind = Strong}
Play = ?
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 12
--- page 13 ---
---
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 13
--- page 14 ---
1. Naïve Bayes Example: Calculation
Calculating Proportional Posteriors:
P(Yes)
P(No)
Result: Since , Play = No
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 14
--- page 15 ---
1. Naïve Bayes Classifiers: Summary
Impact of the conditional independence assumption:
Training becomes very easy and fast - just need to consider each attribute in each
class separately and build up a table of the prior probabilities and conditional
probabilities.
Testing is also easy – just look up the tables and calculate the probability for each
class.
Conclusion:
A popular machine learning algorithm which is fast with competitive performance
(accuracy) compared to other state-of-the-art classifiers.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 15
--- page 16 ---
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 16
--- page 17 ---
KNN Classification Animation
0:00/ 0:12
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 17
--- page 18 ---
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 18
--- page 19 ---
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 19
--- page 20 ---
SVM Learning Animation
0:00/ 0:12
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 20
--- page 21 ---
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 21
--- page 22 ---
The Shift in Predictive Analytics
While traditional models are powerful and computationally efficient for structured data,
they require:
Extensive feature engineering
Large amounts of task-specific labeled data
Model retraining for new categories
The Modern Paradigm (2026):
We are increasingly moving towards Foundation Models that can perform predictive
analytics out-of-the-box using natural language interfaces, dramatically reducing the time-
to-value for new classification tasks.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 22
--- page 23 ---
Part 2: Large Language Models & Prompt Engineering
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 23
--- page 24 ---
Large Language Models as Predictors
LLMs are not just for generating text; they are powerful predictive engines. By framing
classification tasks as text completion, LLMs can predict classes without traditional
training.
Key Advantages:
Zero-Shot Classification: Predict classes without seeing any training examples.
Few-Shot Classification: Provide a few examples in the prompt to drastically improve
accuracy.
Unstructured Data Mastery: Excellently handles text, sentiment, and intent directly
without complex preprocessing.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 24
--- page 25 ---
Zero-Shot Classification
The model is given a task description and the input data, but no examples of the desired
output.
Example: "Classify this review as Positive or Negative: 'The service was terrible.'" ->
Prediction: Negative
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 25
--- page 26 ---
Few-Shot Classification
The model is given a few examples of inputs and outputs before being asked to predict
the new instance.
Example:
"Review: 'Great food' -> Sentiment: Positive
Review: 'Too loud' -> Sentiment: Negative
Review: 'Long wait time' -> Sentiment: ?" -> Prediction: Negative
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 26
--- page 27 ---
Prompt Engineering for Predictive Analytics
In the LLM era, Prompt Engineering has emerged as a core predictive analytics technique.
It replaces traditional model tuning with prompt design.
Modern Techniques:
1. Chain-of-Thought (CoT): Asking the model to "think step-by-step" before making a
prediction improves reasoning and accuracy.
2. Instruction Tuning: Carefully crafting the persona, constraints, and output format
(e.g., JSON) to integrate LLM predictions into automated data pipelines.
3. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG): Providing dynamic context to the LLM to
make predictions based on up-to-date, domain-specific information.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 27
--- page 28 ---
Example: LLM Predictive Pipeline
Prompt:
Extract entities and
predict churn risk (High/Low)
User: "App keeps crashing!"
➔ LLM API ➔
{
"risk": "High",
"reason": "stability"
}
This completely bypasses traditional NLP pipelines (tokenization, feature extraction,
model training) while achieving state-of-the-art predictive performance.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 28
--- page 29 ---
Part 3: Assessing Model Performance
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 29
--- page 30 ---
Classification Setting & Accuracy
In the classification setting, we have a list of pre-defined categories that we want to
classify each observation into.
For classification, one common measure for assessing the model accuracy is Accuracy:
Where  if , and  otherwise.
Basically, the proportion of correct classification instances over all the instances.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 30
--- page 31 ---
Model Evaluation: The Problem
We generally train a model on Training Data and evaluate it on Testing Data.
Problems with a single split approach:
Difficult to evaluate the accuracy/performance of a model or a learning method if
testing data is not readily available.
Performance of a model depends heavily on the specific training data chosen.
Solution:
Make use of Resampling Methods
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 31
--- page 32 ---
Resampling Methods
Idea:
Find the performance by running the experiment multiple times (using the same training
set S).
For each run:
1. Draw a subset of S for training ( ) and a subset of S for testing ( ).
2. Generate a model using  and evaluate on .
Performance = Average of the multiple runs.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 32
--- page 33 ---
Resampling Methods
Advantages:
Can evaluate the model even though we do not have any external testing data.
Can ensure that the training data we are using is good (not biased or noisy).
Allows us to better evaluate a model's true performance.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 33
--- page 34 ---
Resampling Method 1: Validation Set Approach
Randomly split the training data into training and validation (testing) datasets.
E.g., 50% for training, 50% for testing (sample with replacement)
Advantages:
Simple and easy to implement.
Disadvantages:
The validation estimation of the test error rate can be highly variable.
Depends entirely on which observations are included in the training vs validation set.
Only a subset of observations (training data) are used to fit the model. Models trained
on smaller datasets tend to perform worse.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 34
--- page 35 ---
Resampling Method 2: Leave-One-Out (LOOCV)
Idea:
Similar to the validation set approach except that only 1 observation is used for validation
and the remaining  observations are used for training.
The error rate is the average of the  runs.
Advantages:
Less bias (compared to the validation set approach) as almost all data is used for
training.
Less variable error rate/MSE.
Disadvantages:
Computationally expensive. Need to run the model training  times.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 35
--- page 36 ---
Resampling Method 3: K-Fold Cross-Validation
An alternative to LOOCV and commonly used for evaluating model performance.
Instead of splitting the data , randomly divide the set of observations into 
groups (or -fold) each with approximately equal size.
The first fold is treated as a validation set, and the remaining  folds are used for
training.
The accuracy is calculated based on the average of the  runs.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 36
--- page 37 ---
Resampling Method 3: K-Fold Cross-Validation
Properties:
Hybrid approach between validation set approach and LOOCV.
Less computationally expensive compared to LOOCV.
Common value:  (10-Fold Cross Validation).
LOOCV is actually a special case of k-fold cross-validation where .
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 37
--- page 38 ---
Part 4: Clustering
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 38
--- page 39 ---
Supervised vs Unsupervised Learning
Supervised Learning
We have labeled (training) data.
Use the labeled data to train a model for predicting the response on the unlabeled
(testing) data.
Accuracy is always better than (or at least as good as) unsupervised learning.
Not scalable (large amount of labeled data is not always available – nice idea but not
practical).
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 39
--- page 40 ---
Supervised vs Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning
We do not have labeled data; we only have access to unlabeled data (usually in large
amounts).
We want to either label the unlabeled observations or group them into subgroups.
More scalable (large amount of unlabeled data readily available).
Example:
Assume we have access to a large collection of tweets. Can we group the tweets into
similar interests (e.g. Tech, Politics, Singapore, NUS)? The list is not pre-defined.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 40
--- page 41 ---
Why Unsupervised Learning?
Since we already have the supervised learning approach, why do we still need
unsupervised learning?
Unlabeled data is usually readily available (easy problem + able to get large amounts).
Access to large amounts of training data is rarely available.
Creating training data (i.e. labeling the unlabeled data manually by hand) is very
tedious and not scalable.
Unsupervised learning approaches do not require data to be labeled but still can
perform similar grouping tasks.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 41
--- page 42 ---
Clustering
Clustering is an example of an unsupervised learning approach.
It refers to the broad set of techniques for finding similar subgroups, or clusters in a data
set.
A good clustering is when the observations within the same cluster are similar to
each other but different compared to other clusters.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 42
--- page 43 ---
Clustering
Applications of Clustering
Marketing: Discover distinct groups in customer bases and develop targeted
marketing.
Medical: Discover different types of cancer by clustering the data.
Web Search: Grouping words together to suggest related terms.
Social Network: Identifying trending topics.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 43
--- page 44 ---
K-Means Clustering
There are many clustering methods, but we will focus on the most commonly used
approach: K-means Clustering.
K-means clustering requires the user to supply the desired number of clusters ( ). The
observations are then grouped into one of these  clusters.
The K-means clustering algorithm partitions the data into  clusters ( ):
1. Each observation belongs to one of the  clusters.
2. The clusters are non-overlapping. i.e., no observation belongs to more than one
cluster.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 44
--- page 45 ---
K-Means Clustering: The Objective
Idea: a good cluster = one where the within-cluster variation is as small as possible (i.e.
elements within a cluster should be as similar as possible).
Where  is the within-cluster variation for cluster , often measured using squared
Euclidean distance:
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 45
--- page 46 ---
K-Means Algorithm
1. Initialize: Randomly assign observations to  clusters and compute initial centroids.
2. Iterate until convergence:
Compute the centroid for each cluster.
Reassign each observation to the nearest centroid (Euclidean distance).
Note: Results depend on random initialization. Run multiple times with different starting
points to avoid local optima.
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 46
--- page 47 ---
K-Means Clustering: Visual Animation
0:00/ 0:30
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 47
--- page 48 ---
What's Next?
Mining Web Content I
©2026 Lek Hsiang Hui. All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or otherwise, without prior written permission of the owner. 48